<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Lecointe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Au Pays de manchots</i>. Brussels, 1904. <abbr class="eoc">8vo.</abbr> <a href="preface.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr class="name">J. B.</abbr> Charcot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal de l’expédition antartique française. 1903⁠–⁠1905</i>. Paris. <abbr class="eoc">8vo.</abbr> <a href="preface.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Orb, poetically, a globe when speaking of the heavenly bodies. By extension any species of globular body.” <cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Littre</i>.</cite> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We have vainly sought for this phrase in Pliny’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Natural History</i>. <cite>—⁠Editor.</cite> <a href="chapter-2-12.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Penguin chronicler who relates the fact employs the expression, <i xml:lang="la">Species inductilis</i>. I have endeavoured to translate it literally. <a href="chapter-3-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The text runs</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
						<p>
							<span>… qualem primo qui syrgere mense</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Aut videt aut vidisse putat per nubila lunam.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Brother Marbodius, by a strange misunderstanding, substitutes an entirely different image for the one created by the poet. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Three centuries before the epoch in which our Marbodius lived the words⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
						<p>
							<span>Maro, vates gentilium</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Da Christo testimonium</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">were sung in the churches on Christmas Day. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
						<p>
							<span>Ad maronis mausoleum</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ductus, fudit super eum</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Piae rorem lacrymae.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>Quem te, intuit, reddidissem,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Si te vivum invenissem</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Poetarum maxime!</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This phrase seems to indicate that, if one is to believe Macrobius, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Copa</i> is by Virgil. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is in Marbodius’s narrative a passage very worthy of notice, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, that in which the monk of Corrigan describes Dante Alighieri such as we picture him to ourselves today. The miniatures in a very old manuscript of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Divine Comedy</i>, the “Codex Venetianus,” represent the poet as a little fat man clad in a short tunic, the skirts of which fall above his knees. As for Virgil, he still wears the philosophical beard, in the wood engravings of the sixteenth century.</p>
					<p>One would not have thought either that Marbodius, or even Virgil, could have known the Etruscan tombs of Chiusi and Corneto, where, in fact, there are horrible and burlesque devils closely resembling those of Orcagna. Nevertheless, the authenticity of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Descent of Marbodius into Hell</i> is indisputable. <abbr>M.</abbr> du Clos des Lunes has firmly established it. To doubt it would be to doubt palaeography itself. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Or better, <em>Emiralty</em>. <a href="chapter-5-4.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O Father Zeus, only save thou the sons of the Acheans from the darkness, and make clear sky and vouchsafe sight to our eyes, and then, so it be but light, slay us, since such is thy good pleasure. <a href="book-6.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Ernest Charles in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Censeur</i>, May-August, 1907, <abbr>p.</abbr> 562, <abbr>col.</abbr> 2. <a href="chapter-7-2.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As this ministry exercised considerable influence upon the destinies of the country and of the world, we think it well to give its composition: Minister of the Interior and Prime Minister, Paul Visire; Minister of Justice, Pierre Bouc; Foreign Affairs, Victor Crombile; Finance, Terrasson; Education, Labillette; Commerce, Posts and Telegraphs, Hippolyte Cérès; Agriculture, Aulac; Public Works, Lapersonne; War, General Débonnaire; Admiralty, Admiral Vivier des Murènes. <a href="chapter-7-5.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Poverty hast ever been familiar to Greece, but virtue has been acquired, having been accomplished by wisdom and firm laws. <cite>—⁠Henry Cary’s Translation.</cite> <a href="book-8.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
